# In lieu of strategy: ground operations and organisational structure

Common Knowledge's submission to the Labour Together's report on Labour in the 2019 General Election.

The other is [System updates required: ground operations and digital technology](system-updates-required.md).

# Contents

[<span class="underline">Key insights</span>](#key-insights)

[<span class="underline">The challenge of objectively evaluating the party</span>](#the-challenge-of-objectively-evaluating-the-party)

[<span class="underline">Headquarters strategy and communications</span>](#headquarters-strategy-and-communications)

## 2019

[<span class="underline">The challenge of an active membership</span>](#the-challenge-of-an-active-membership)

[<span class="underline">Membership as a process</span>](#membership-as-a-process)

[<span class="underline">Experiments in community organising</span>](#experiments-in-community-organising)

[<span class="underline">Experimentation and party culture</span>](#experimentation-and-party-culture)

[<span class="underline">Recommendations: community, membership and constituency</span>](#recommendations-community-membership-and-constituency)

Given the situation the party finds itself in, the scale of the defeat
and challenge ahead, this report aims to (a) give clarity and creative
assessment to the complaint that Labour's digital technologies are a
disappointment and (b) to add clarity to the puzzle of community
organising as a party function. What can realistically be gained from
the discussion of "getting back into the community?”

The rest of this report will elaborate on the primary themes of digital
technology and community organising by highlighting and exploring
various challenges of running an election campaign with the party
machine as it was available in the Autumn of 2019.

## Key insights

- This report's top line assessment of the Labour Party's 2019
  general election campaign is that, amidst generalised uncertainty
  over political communications and strategy, **the party did not
  have a practical party-wide plan to win the election**, leaving
  party staff and members to conduct a conventional and fairly
  mediocre ground and air operation. This was described to us by
  various phrases amounting to "business as usual" and a redo of the
  2017 campaign, a campaign itself that largely worked in the same
  manner as 2015. Tellingly, whilst the campaign seems to have
  improved in terms of a few operational metrics since 2017, it
  clearly failed in many practical regards (not to mention
  political) and by some notable measures, likely degraded.

<!-- end list -->

- **Member activity to be stoked.** Fundamental voter ID operations
  were inhibited by **a lack of year-round membership activism**,
  with officers and staff wishing for more involvement whilst both
  recent and long-term members are uncertain about how to get
  involved and in many cases are passively dissuaded by their
  experiences with the local constituency and general party
  apparatus.

- **Constituency capability to be developed.** The short campaign's
  substantial increase in member activity did not generally mirror
  an improvement in the technical ability of campaigns to run an
  operation. The prevailing themes were **consistent uncertainty
  around basic rules, regulations, procedure, techniques, operations
  and plans, reporting lines and structures of the party.** Many
  members, officers and staff were led to feel variously
  unconfident, unskilled, unprepared and poorly resourced to run
  even a business as usual campaign.

- **Digital access to be unlocked.** In particular, substantial
  evidence points to **widespread irregularities in provision of
  access to data and digital tools** which enable a constituency to
  operate even a basic campaign, with reports of explicit refusals,
  communication issues, uncertainty and delays sufficient enough to
  negatively affect numerous campaigns' basic voter contact
  activities.

- **Technical debts to be paid.** Furthermore, although members,
  officers and some staff share a view that the party's digital
  tools are difficult to use if not basically unreliable, **there is
  only one permanent software developer** and **no clear strategy or
  investment for maintaining and developing digital tools** which
  facilitate constituency organising.The Voter ID-enabling suite of
  tools—Contact Creator, Insight and Mosaic—which are themselves
  increasingly in need of iteration are managed separately.

- **Experimentation to replace contention.** Attitudes towards the
  Community Organising Unit (COU) allowed lop-sided, informal
  scrutiny over team performance which was not applied equally to
  all teams. If leant into and practiced more widely under the
  auspices of shared goals could form **the basis of a vibrant and
  innovative party campaigning culture.** At the moment it leads to
  unproductive interpersonal and inter organisational tensions.

- **Conventions to be transparently evaluated.** We agree with the
  general conclusion that, in the short campaign alone, a more
  effective ground operation would not be able to bridge the gulf of
  possibility between the party and the electorate. In fact, we are
  pleasantly surprised that so little preparation and campaigning
  has resulted in so many seats held. The party should do more to
  actively work outside of the short campaign. As has been generally
  commented on and substantiated by Lord Ashcroft's post-election
  voter analysis\[1\], perceptions of distant Labour councillors
  spoke to the perceived attitude of Labour in government and
  weakened the party’s trust in the eyes of the public

## The challenge of objectively evaluating the party

This research project collected new evidence from a qualitative review
of 10,000 survey responses, a noting of common themes throughout the
dataset that speak to well-established and relevant party issues. The
research then conducted follow-on anonymous research interviews with
people with direct experience and understanding about relevant functions
of the party in terms of their self-organisation, coordination with the
rest of the party and longer term perspective on the party's operations.

In producing this report, we note our efforts have been hindered by
staff and to a lesser extent members being reluctant to speak even under
the condition of anonymity. This has been exacerbated by the direct
briefing by Labour Party senior managers not to engage with the research
effort and pointed complaints to the commission for seeking comment.
Whilst we recognise that internal investigations may well be occurring,
it is unclear how much of this information will ultimately come to
light, considering our experience in conducting this investigation.
Indeed, we believe party transparency to be a productive area of
discussion for the themes at hand. Accessible data with which to assess
our party's operations has arrived mainly through leaks to the press and
in some cases through anonymous commentary to the commission, but this
speaks to the opaqueness of a political party and contributes to our
challenge in the Labour movement of mounting a **_constructive_**
critique of the electoral machine and the leadership of the party that
is, ultimately, one of the most central vehicles of progressive politics
in the United Kingdom. As this report will explore, a lack of
transparency has generally allowed a culture of “stay in your lane” and
“are you authorised to see this?” to prevail. The reaction of some
Labour party staff and members to conducting this report sadly reflects
a culture of secrecy and hostility towards even good faith attempts to
recommend changes that is ultimately counter-productive. We thank the
people who did contribute for their time.

This report also takes into account an appraisal of Labour Party
constituency membership experiences, community organising and digital
technology by a previous round of research conducted for a
not-for-profit project in October 2018, which interviewed 20
London-based activists and organisers with various levels of party
experience. It also draws on Common Knowledge’s direct experience of
work in the Momentum offices developing the MyCampaignMap and
MyPollingDay digital tools, in occasional coordination with Labour Party
staff.

The intention is to provide a good-faith analysis of practical and
organisational matters, from the perspective of researcher practitioners
of digital technology and political organising including in a UK and
international political and third sector context. In our work here we
have attempted to perform a “no-blame” analysis, looking at systems,
limitations and possibilities, rather than counter-productively focusing
on persons and blame, a technique common in the software engineering
industry.

## Headquarters strategy and communications

As the commission heard directly, fundamental disagreements about voter
coalitions and political strategy played out between multiple levels of
the Labour Party’s political representative and staff units. From 2015
this was most fundamentally along factional and pseudo-factional lines
and from 2016 was overlaid by the dividing issue of EU membership and
following the Brexit vote on the handling of the referendum result.

These congealed divisions within party headquarters hindered the
development of a coherent and shared strategy. Such a strategy might
have been developed in detail and practiced throughout the different
teams and functions and structures of the party. Instead the commission
heard from staff about a generalised, almost ‘cultural’ norm of
contentious and unconstructive meetings in Labour Party HQ (generally
referred to as Southside) which have at times deferred more practical
and creative decision-making.

Although we know that many of the campaign dysfunctions noted in 2019
were preexistent in previous election campaigns, a strategic approach to
communications may have allowed the Labour Party to sidestep the effects
of some of these internal contentions in the 2017 election. Following
the change in party leadership in 2015, a new Executive Directorate of
Strategy and Communications was created out of previously separate teams
and roles, mirroring the new function of Strategic Communications in the
Leader of the Opposition’s Office (LOTO). It was able to make a simple
pitch to voters that they would respect the EU referendum outcome and
then roll through a daily grid of perceived ‘radical’ policies in which
the manifesto debuted, with a frantic activist-led mobilisation strategy
that involved, for outrider organisations like Momentum, emphasising
marginal seats of any kind.

### 2019

By comparison in 2019, the ability of the political leadership to
coherently speak about Brexit was felt to have been lost, as political
contentions accumulated and the ability of the party’s leadership to
decide on a consistent and substantial approach to strategic
communications around the subject declined.

Asked what they understood the 2019 election strategy to be, within
which their work fitted into, party staff and members generally
responded with uncertainty, often falling back to their job description,
before noting that in Southside especially these are frequently not
congruent with day to day responsibilities. In practical terms, this
election was felt to be simultaneously “business as usual” as well as
lacking in some obvious basics.

> “This was a bog standard election”

— Regional staffer

Central party staff reported not knowing in advance the arc of the
campaign, upcoming announcements even a few days away, or how to
contribute towards the election beyond their team’s own day-to-day
technical tasks and occasional calls for collaboration from pre-warned
staff.

The central party’s communications grid was adhered to, which a party
source noted bore a strong resemblance to 2017’s, in tandem with a
secretive approach intended to prevent leaks. There is a difference
between protecting aspects of a campaign from operational risks
associated with opponents awareness and doing this to an extent where it
hampers one’s own effort. It should be noted the Tories “red wall”
strategy was extensively briefed to the press both prior and throughout
the campaign. Anecdotally, Dominic Cummings explicitly told senior
Labour advisors of their strategic gambit to goad them into an
election\! It is not important that a strategy is secret for it to be
effective.

In lieu of a more substantial strategy which articulated precisely what
election gains could be achieved and how different parts of the party
would concretely work together, individual units progressed through
their own day to day campaign calendars in the hope that the parallel
efforts of everyone would have an aggregate effect by virtue of the fact
they were nominally part of the same campaign.

## The challenge of an active membership

A substantial challenge for the party in this election was to mobilise
volunteers to canvas the electorate at their doors, in the cold and
early darkness of late Autumn. At least one critical internal party
report, leaked to the _Guardian_, has already broken down the
dysfunctions of the Labour Party’s Voter ID operation, noting a deficit
of skill, resources and activity amongst constituencies.\[2\] The
commission has accumulated a bulk of evidence of the same, suggesting
there should be much more serious concern for the many local parties
that cannot rely on their membership to conduct year-round voter ID to
the extent that facilitates an efficient, let alone effective, election
campaign. There is plainly consensus that year-round member activity is
low, that the responsibility of constituency organising is often handled
by frequently “more experienced” members and that this is affecting
year-round contact rates.

How was this often dysfunctional campaign allowed to happen? The
evidence suggests that this was not a buck in the trend; the “business
as usual” structures of the Labour Party relied on in 2019 was
compositionally very similar to 2017 and likely even earlier election
campaigns, despite changes in paper membership and light team
restructuring. Yet despite the 2015-2019 party leadership’s vocal
support for “member-led”, “grassroots” party activity, practical
consensus that improvements are needed. Apart from the existence of a
Membership Mobilisation and Activation Team in Southside, we were unable
to identify a party-wide membership strategy in operation at
constituency, regional and national level to rectify this situation and
the implications for constituency campaigns are bad.

### Membership as a process

“We’ve generally seen the Membership Officer role as an administrative
one, but I guess we should have a strategy”

— Executive committee member in the South East

Community organiser Arnie Graf was hired by Ed Miliband to write a 2011
report on the dysfunctions of the Labour Party and identified some
fundamental issues which at this point are uncontroversial but worth
restating:\[3\]

- “A **bureaucratic** rather than a relational party culture” in
  local constituencies which severely limits the potential of what
  membership can mean.

- **Centralisation** of decision making power away from members, and
  towards London-based senior leaders and staff.

- **A closed culture,** suspicious of outsiders and inaccessible to
  newcomers.

- A general consensus that meetings, which comprise the bulk of
  regular Labour Party business, are **dull** rather than first and
  foremost emotionally inspiring events.

Our investigation of the party in 2019 found little contrast. Graf’s
suggestions in 2011 included:

- A trial of **open primaries**, where parliamentary prospective
  candidates are selected by the electorate at large rather than by
  the local party membership or national party leadership.

- A **supporters network membership tier**, sold to sympathetic
  voters as a lesser commitment than membership on a ladder to
  Labour Party engagement.

- **Collective party membership for community groups**, in the same
  fashion as trade union and socialist society affiliation.

Recommendations in this vein seek to bridge people through stages of
lower to higher commitment, with an emphasis on increasingly practical
and collective social engagement within the “extended Labour Party
universe” based on preexisting relationships with individuals and groups
in the area. This is a standard systematic approaches shared by
political organising and other functions like sales. Similar conceptual
models include “**pipelines**”, “**funnels**” and “**wall charts**” more
frequently found in political and trade union organising.

**Voter → Supporter → New Member → Engaged Member → Organising Member**

With a conceptual model in place, organisers and organisations can
ensure that bridges exist to move people along to higher commitment, and
address barriers to movement. A process framework like this also makes
it simple to measure and evaluate the membership system: administration
becomes a case of investigation, experimentation and improvement, rather
than of static management.

Digital organising platforms like Action Network and Nation Builder,
which the Labour Party previously paid around £200,000 per year for
until its replacement by the bespoke _Organise_ system, have long
encoded pipeline systems for individuals that can concretise this
approach.

![](.//media/image3-1.png)

![](.//media/image2-1.png)

###

Much like a constituency can measure and optimise its canvassing and
direct mail schedule, doorstep techniques and messaging to make the most
of the Voter ID system, the required inputs for this system — members
and good local knowledge — can also be systematised, measured and
optimised.

Disappointingly, we routinely heard experiences of **members first
receiving a Labour Party email only many months or even years after
joining**, also variously receiving postal materials, a symptom of an
inconsistent approach to active membership for basic Voter ID
operations.

> “CLP politics needs to move beyond just passing motions. CLPs are too
> inward focused, **meetings are often hostile to new members and are
> often very procedural and boring.** (I've been a member for 6 years
> and still only go relatively infrequently and I'm a labour obsessive
> that follows every turn in the media and canvassed countless hours in
> the campaign).”
>
> — Canvasser from Walthamstow CLP

The theme of **constituency accessibility** comes across strongly in
feedback to the commission.

### Experiments in community organising

In the aftermath of the 2019 election what has been added on to the
broad consensus about party dysfunctions is the discussion that, in some
way, the party must “get back into our communities.”\[4\] Yet this was
also a stream of discussion in the 2010 party leadership race, where the
Movement For Change initiative was developed and later operationalised
under Graf’s supervision into a mass community organising programme
including 200 paid organisers and 1,000 more volunteers trained to work
in marginal seats.

The model was comparable to that employed by Labour Party councillors
especially in the middle of the 20th Century, when trade unions and
labour party were considerably more intertwined on a day to day
grassroots level: councillors were sometimes described as “neighbourhood
shop stewards” and one interviewee we spoke to from Manchester recalled
that **councillors were expected to diarise their contacts and casework
with residents** and submit to scrutiny and disciplining about how
engaged in the community they were. In 2019, perceptions of Labour
councillors were particularly dim:

> _“They take our votes for granted and think we were born yesterday.”_
>
> More broadly, _“I don’t think they get out and listen to people like
> they used to. They used to be part of the local community, but they
> became complacent. They thought ‘whatever we do we’re going to get the
> votes off the local people, especially in the North,’ but it didn’t
> work like that;”_
>
> _“The council has been Labour all my life and they are shocking. Fly
> tipping is awful;”_
>
> _“Stoke has always been Labour but it hasn’t done us any favours. If
> you walk round, some of it is quite scary. It was voted the 9th worst
> place to live;”_
>
> _“Bridgend has grown exponentially but how many new hospitals and GPs
> have we got? You’d think they’d take these problems back to
> Westminster. There are more and more people but there is no
> infrastructure, no plans, nothing;”..._
>
> _“In Conservative-led councils, the roads are better, the schools are
> better.”_\[5\]

Perhaps the most identifiable attempts to continue this experiment
within the party since Graf has been the Community Organising Unit
(COU), active since 2017, seemingly taking on many of the accumulated
suggestions. Following the same Alinskyite model,\[6\] each organiser is
assigned to one or more target marginal seats and is tasked with mapping
their communities, identifying and building relationships with community
leaders. Community campaigns are developed through these collaborations
which can demonstrate the practical outcomes of the local Labour Party,
building affinity to the party and possibly on-ramping new members. This
can involve trainings in community organising and the like.

Where the COU has gone further is in its experimentation with
community-driven policy formulation, notably contributing to the
priorities and framing of the Green Industrial Revolution and Free
Internet Broadband policies in collaboration with Shadow Cabinet staff.
Workshops and “barnstorm” town-hall style meetings unearth collective
opinions and needs in a similar vein to **focus grouping**, only in this
case conducted by party staff.

After locally identifying policy and framing opportunities, this model
seems to have broken down in the transmission through to the national
party and less clear methods for policy development and communication to
the public. Much of the value of this model is in the narrative of local
communities designing their own futures. In lieu of a party-wide
strategy there seems to be no strong mechanism for effectively enabling
these initiatives, without substantial political and personal
sponsorship to defend it from dilution and hollowing out through the
prevailing policy development system.

### Experimentation and party culture

The COU has been a contentious experiment in alternative organising. It
emerged in a more explicitly factional and politically antagonistic
period amidst the EU referendum result than did Graf’s initiatives.
While there are differences between the two in terms of approach and
theories of change, it is highly likely that similar party dynamics
affected both attempts to build a community organising function within
Labour.

Efforts in 2010-15 to reorient the party towards membership- and
community-centric organising, predominantly in target marginals, could
not prevent 2015 general election defeat. Graf noted that the organisers
he had advised to recruit were conducting, on average, only 0 to 3
meetings with community members per week. Instead, administrative duties
like data entry, membership dispute and compliance investigations
swamped their schedules and **there was a preference to use available
time to conduct basic Voter ID.**\[7\]

> “How can the Party grow if the organisers are meeting so few new
> people? How can they develop local issue campaigns if they are not
> meeting the informal leadership that exists in every community in the
> country?”

Presumably, hired organisers were conducting Voter ID because of a lack
of organic local membership which could be relied on to maintain
acceptable contact rates, but then this entirely sidelined the objective
of the community organising strategy: **party growth** which can
appreciate people as members of their community before their party. A
generally passive resistance to change in favour of business as usual
still seems self-evident in much of the party. COU interviewees
summarised intra-organisational challenges as a "cultural" problem, "not
even just from the top.” They frequently referred to a "resistance to
change" and observed a prevailing feeling amongst those who had "always
done things a certain way," something also noted by Graf.

A prevailing measure of performance will inevitably trickle down into
the decisions around resource allocation, team coordination,
preparations and improvements. Our assessment is that **“contact rates”
as the prevailing measure of party performance has likely prevailed over
and against any particular political strategy** in at least the last
four election campaigns, and this prevailing view has repercussions.

- Despite an explicit operating model, the COU has suffered from a
  consistent illegibility problem, for instance being frequently
  confused with the Training Team.

- One effect was a perceived need to frequently justify the COU's
  budget and approach through voluntary reports, often from the
  perspective of 'contact rates'. There was a feeling of
  disproportionate pressure and scrutiny on individuals, resulting
  in some welfare issues. **But do other teams and units regularly
  report on their outputs and outcomes? What would an analysis of
  proportionate input/output/outcome of different teams reveal about
  the relative efficacy?** Would we deem the general scepticism
  towards the COU to be justified? **This has not been possible to
  conduct without breakdowns of budget and substantial data**, but a
  more consistent and universal approach to the scrutiny experienced
  by the COU could positively orient party culture in the direction
  of action, rather than turf.

- Ironically, in attempting to support election-time canvassing
  through persuasive conversation training, there was a general
  puzzlement as to why the COU was not instead doing community
  organising and in some cases the critique was levelled at the unit
  about why precious canvassing time was being diverted into
  training.

- An organisational focus on Voter ID has had long-term effects on
  infrastructure. The commission noted generally positive feedback
  about the tools Contact Creator, Insight and Mosaic 6 which
  critically support the Voter ID-oriented party operations. By
  comparison, tools that supported activities other than
  straightforward doorknocking including Organise, Connects,
  Promote, Dialogue and Doorstep were much less reliably available,
  useful or approved of by members, to the detriment of more general
  campaign and party operations.

Graf’s recommendations in the aftermath of the 2015 general election in
comparison to the 2011 recommendations in their focus on cultural change
rather than novel ideas. Recommended advice included more frequent
meetings with regional directors and organisers in the field and a
dissolution of the distinction between the leadership, national and
regional staff.\[8\] Specifically for the Movement For Change programme
of organisers, the advice was to commit substantially more time to the
relational organising and additionally conduct trainings in basic public
skills and organising techniques to increase and reproduce these
activities; explicit measurables which COU organisers themselves track
such as 15 one-to-one meetings per week with community leaders aside
from trainings and other measurable activities.

**KPIs, objectives and key results, and other measures of fundamental
outcomes are de rigueur for collective organisation in other political
campaigns, governmental departments, charitable organisations and
commercial firms.** The Beto O'Rourke campaign of 2018 went so far as to
publicly display all contact rates data on a website to enable member
self-organisation.

![](.//media/image4-1.png)

We have a series of recommendations for further discussion, development
and inclusion in the commission’s final publication, based on the above
analysis.

## Recommendations: community, membership and constituency

To encourage greater accessibility and transparency between party and
community.

- All general meetings to be made available to the public and
  advertised as forums to discuss local issues.

- Encourage and fund delegations of members to meet with members in
  neighbouring branches and constituencies and regions for
  educational visits and solidarity-building.

- Press ahead with supporter network and community group
  memberships.

- Increase the ratio of regional organisers to central office staff
  supported by a Constituency Development Budget.

- Roll-out of political organising weekend and weeknight courses in
  target seats, accessible to any member and aimed at different

- Start measuring different aspects of election readiness, and make
  all data for all constituencies should be publicly accessible via
  an analytics web page. This will ensure transparency and pressure
  to face up to the facts.

Measurements might include:

- **"Residents per active monthly member" ratio** — check whether
  members have shown up each month with a tick box. Can be
  self-reported and/or noted by constituency organisers/officers.

- Three month rolling new members

* Three month rolling lapsed members

- **Digital access rate (%)** of CLP and BLP officers with
  self-reported correct **access** to core tools like Organise,
  Contact Creator, Insight, Promote, Connects.

<!-- end list -->

- Measurements of “contact rates” should be more nuanced if they are
  to be used as a north star for party organising. At present they
  privilege aggregate “official” party activity directed at
  individualised voters, rather than everyday interactions between
  party members and their fellow community neighbours.

  - Three month rolling contact rate

  - Average age of party preference report

  - Monthly rolling weekly resident contacts per councillor /
    organiser / caseworker

* Diarised casework and resident contact activities by elected
  officials such as councillors, MPs

* A national listening campaign which also builds visibility, local
  party activity, leading to a handful of national campaigns per
  year, that can link the air war and local organising. E.g. renter
  rights, £10 min wage. This would simplify production of generic
  assets and build visibility/material results/organic links between
  local party members and community

* Political and communication strategy and production should be much
  more focused on the story of "us, not me" community relationships,
  consensus-building, policy-design and organising by communities
  themselves, rather than the menu of output policies.

---

1.  ‘Diagnosis of Defeat: Labour’s Turn to Smell the Coffee’ (Lord
    Ashcroft Polls, 10 February 2020), 17,
    https://lordashcroftpolls.com/2020/02/diagnosis-of-defeat-labours-turn-to-smell-the-coffee/.

2.  Kate Proctor, ‘Labour’s Canvassing Strategy Had “Major
    Deficiencies”, Leaked Report Says’, _The Guardian_, 7 February
    2020, sec. Politics,
    https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2020/feb/07/labours-canvassing-strategy-had-major-deficiencies-leaked-report-says.

3.  Rowenna Davis, ‘Arnie Graf: The Man Ed Miliband Asked to Rebuild
    Labour’, _The Guardian_, 21 November 2012, sec. Politics,
    https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/nov/21/arnie-graf-labour-party-miliband.

4.  ‘Labour’s Path Back to Power Will Be through on-the-Ground Activism
    | Lisa Nandy’, the Guardian, 3 January 2020,
    http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jan/03/labour-power-activism-leader;
    ‘In Defence of Community Organising’, accessed 16 June 2020,
    https://tribunemag.co.uk/2020/02/in-defence-of-community-organising;
    Chaminda Jayanetti, ‘The Problem with Labour’s “Community
    Organising” Pitch? It Has No Idea How to Organise a Community’,
    accessed 16 June 2020,
    https://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/politics/community-organising-labour-party-chaminda-jayanetti;
    ‘Labour’s Complacency Lost It Northern Seats — the Tories Must
    Change to Keep Them’, accessed 16 June 2020,
    https://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2019/12/labour-s-complacency-lost-it-northern-seats-tories-must-change-keep-them;
    ‘Organising Is in Our DNA - Now We Need It More than Ever’,
    LabourList, 19 January 2020,
    https://labourlist.org/2020/01/organising-is-in-our-dna-now-we-need-it-more-than-ever/;
    John Harris, ‘A Labour Revival Must Tap into the Energy for Change
    on the Ground | John Harris’, _The Guardian_, 15 December 2019, sec.
    Opinion,
    https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/dec/15/labour-revival-change-community-activists-plymouth.

5.  ‘Diagnosis of Defeat’, 17.

6.  Saul David Alinsky, _Rules for Radicals: A Practical Primer for
    Realistic Radicals_, Vintage Books ed (New York: Vintage Books,
    1989).

7.  ‘Labour’s Failure Had Little to Do with Organisers in the Field’,
    LabourList, 4 August 2015,
    https://labourlist.org/2015/08/labours-failure-had-little-to-do-with-organisers-in-the-field/.

8.  ‘Labour’s Failure Had Little to Do with Organisers in the Field’.
