# System updates required: ground operations and digital technology

[Common Knowledge](https://commonknowledge.coop)'s submission to the Labour Together's report on Labour in the 2019 General Election.

The other is [In lieu of strategy: ground operations and organisational structure](in-lieu-of-strategy.md).

# Contents

[<span class="underline">How Labour does digital</span>](#section)

[<span class="underline">Social media</span>](#social-media)

[<span class="underline">Electoral data</span>](#electoral-data)

[<span class="underline">Digital tools for
campaigning</span>](#digital-tools-for-campaigning)

[<span class="underline">Understaffed development team, reliance on
temporary
staff</span>](#understaffed-development-team-reliance-on-temporary-staff)

[<span class="underline">Hiring embargo on digital
staff</span>](#hiring-embargo-on-digital-staff)

[<span class="underline">Under-utilised digital technology
volunteers</span>](#under-utilised-digital-technology-volunteers)

[<span class="underline">Staff contentions rather than
collaboration</span>](#staff-contentions-rather-than-collaboration)

[<span class="underline">A lack of digital technology
leadership</span>](#a-lack-of-digital-technology-leadership)

[<span class="underline">Siloed and manager-heavy
organisation</span>](#siloed-and-manager-heavy-organisation)

[<span class="underline">Bugs in the
system</span>](#bugs-in-the-ecosystem)

[<span class="underline">Access to digital
infrastructure</span>](#access-to-digital-infrastructure)

[<span class="underline">Confusion over
GDPR</span>](#confusion-over-gdpr)

[<span class="underline">Usability of digital
infrastructure</span>](#usability-of-digital-infrastructure)

[<span class="underline">Gaps in the party’s digital
ecosystem</span>](#gaps-in-the-partys-digital-ecosystem)

[<span class="underline">Door knocking and issue
mapping</span>](#door-knocking-and-issue-mapping)

[<span class="underline">A single view of voter
contacts</span>](#a-single-view-of-voter-contacts)

[<span class="underline">A canonical solution for
GOTV</span>](#a-canonical-solution-for-gotv)

[<span class="underline">Activist
mobilisation</span>](#activist-mobilisation)

[<span class="underline">Increasing accessibility to the
party</span>](#_bsugvyi9bv8)

[<span class="underline">Community-building</span>](#_hux9f8r6kg06)

[<span class="underline">Crowdsourcing</span>](#_3og1bent5r84)

[<span class="underline">Casework</span>](#_vuj07fy9lnft)

[<span class="underline">Organisational
change</span>](#recommendations)

[<span class="underline">Digital team
change</span>](#digital-team-change)

[<span class="underline">Programmes and
initiatives</span>](#programmes-and-initiatives)

Our report on the Labour Party’s digital technology comes amidst a
general recognition that the party’s digital ecosystem is less than
perfect, with consistent commentary about the unreliability of tools
like _Dialogue_. The frustrations of many campaigners are linked to a
lack of clarity about digital and data and how it is managed.

First we break down how Labour “does” digital from three aspects: data
analysis for targeting purposes, digital social media, and digital tools
for campaign organising.

Then we analyse the thematic issues and note their organisational
dimensions.

We finally make recommendations about filling the gaps in the party’s
digital ecosystem, including how the Labour Party as an organisation
will likely need to adapt to make this possible.

# How Labour does digital

Talk about digital often conflates social media, apps and data but in
the Labour Party a number of different hierarchies deal with these
separately.

![](.//media/image6.png)

### Social media![](.//media/image1.png)

This was handled variously by constituency-level volunteers, regional
office and COU staff as well as two national teams, one reporting to
LOTO and the other (Digital Campaigns) reporting to, according to who
you believe, the Executive Director for Strategy and Communications _OR_
for Elections and Campaigns. Constituency and regional staff made
extensive use of **_Promote._**

### Electoral data

This was managed by the Targeting & Analysis Team, who produced models
and recommendations like **target seats**, **most likely voters**,
**ideal contact times**.

**Target seats** recommendations were discussed by the Strategy Group, a
regular meeting of senior politicians, staff and advisors, and mediated
by the regional directors in contact with constituency campaigns.

These recommendations significantly influenced NEC spending decisions
for constituency campaign staff, who negotiated for organisers. As a
last chance, constituency campaigns would go ‘cap in hand’ to trade
union funding sources.

Ultimately, models from the Targeting & Analysis Team were fed through
to the **_Insight_** digital tool which made recommendations to
constituency campaigners as to who to target for door-knocking,
phonebanking, social media ads and postal mail.

### Digital tools for campaigning

These tools were used by constituency, regional and national staff and
members throughout the campaign; this diagram points out the teams
responsible for each tool’s maintenance:

![](.//media/image7.png)

What we want to point out is the sheer quantity of digital tools that
the Labour Party operates, has purchased from third parties, and the
spread of these tools across different teams and directorates.

Frequently, comments about digital tools from members and staff will
speak of an “Organise team”, a “Dialogue team” or similar. This myth
needs to be expelled: **the Labour Party has one full time software
engineer dedicated to campaigning tools, responsible for 7 digital
systems.** The Digital Campaigns team also has at least one web
developer, but they are not responsible for the vast array of tools
described above.

Additional software engineers are brought in on an ad-hoc basis, such as
during the election, or on a monthly retainer to build new features and
handle issues of high usage and critical failures.

![](.//media/image3.png)

## Understaffed development team, reliance on temporary staff

A lack of full-time development staff meant that a backlog of
improvements, fixes and new features for tools like _Dialogue_,
_Organise_ and _Events_ could not be implemented before the 2019
election actually began.

Throughout 2018 and 2019 a series of collective messages from CLP
secretaries to the General Secretary and the “Organise team” were sent,
noting with frustration the slow pace of development. Without a core
staff to evolve the systems in tune with how they are used and
experienced, these concerns have lingered on into election periods.

Our expectation for an organisation the size of the Labour Party would
be to have one fully resourced cross-functional team working on digital
tooling at all times. This would be around 7 +/- 3 people. The mix of
skills which would depend on the goals of the team at a given time but,
say, three-four software engineers, one UX and digital design
specialist, and a product and project management specialist would be
minimum.

A comparably sized permanent team can be found in most universities and
larger charities. It should be noted that the commercial equivalents of
each of these tools would resource whole teams onto each of them. A
commercial equivalent of a tool like Organise would be Nationbuilder or
even MailChimp, and they have multiple teams working on the product
continuously. Universities and large charities are in a similar
position, with multiple tools, but they also have permanently resourced
teams, working on each tool in a serial fashion.

## Hiring embargo on digital staff

A critical issue that faced the Digital Organising team and possibly
other teams in Southside was a **hiring embargo** imposed by Finance &
Operations.

Typically, in the months running up to a known or suspected election,
temporary staff will be brought into teams as preparation. This is
especially necessary in the case of the party’s software engineers for a
few reasons:

- The party’s digital systems are not fully documented as this takes
  substantial resources and is often deferred until after
  high-intensity periods like election campaigns.

  Unfortunately, because there is only one full-time developer and
  contractors are only hired for the course of an election, new
  systems and changes to existing systems are often never
  documented. On the other hand, because systems are not documented,
  it takes more time to “onboard” a new engineer—i.e. familiarise
  them with the systems and development processes—before they can
  begin to be helpful. Knowing this was the case, Common Knowledge
  offered our skills in documenting and providing setup automations
  or instructions for each system in order to anticipate this
  situation and quoted for it. This was in August 2019. The proposal
  for this was blocked by the Director of Technology and this work
  did not go ahead.

  This clear case of catch-22 has a knock-on effect: it increases
  the likelihood of introducing new bugs and decreasing reliability
  and makes fixing bugs less straightforward and self-explanatory.
  **In light of the serious reliability issues faced by users in
  this election, this catch-22 is a serious cause for concern.**

- Onboarding a new engineer requires the time and attention of a
  team member. This is normally not a serious problem but the Labour
  Party’s Digital Organising team is responsible for seven live
  systems with only one full-time developer with support from the
  team head. **When the hiring embargo was lifted at the start of
  the election campaign, the digital team staff were preoccupied
  with hiring and onboarding new staff** which took their attention
  away from pressing work to be done on systems like Dialogue, which
  was deployed late and without adequate testing.

- Because of the relative difficulty with hiring competent and
  correctly-skilled software engineers, a lead time of many weeks if
  not months is usually factored in for hires. In this case, **the
  Digital Organising team was only at full capacity two weeks into
  the six week campaign.**

Especially given the need for inter-constituency campaigning and the
resulting need across the party for Dialogue, this case seems to be a
straightforward failure of consequence management at the highest levels:
**financial restrictions affected the development of basic campaigning
infrastructure, which likely affected the election result.**

It should be noted that in 2017 as in 2019 foundational development
tasks were being done during the election, such as the implementation of
the Login For Labour internal authentication system.

## Under-utilised digital technology volunteers

Labour is fortunate enough to have several networks of member volunteers
who are technology professionals. Overall though, technical volunteers
were an under organised and underutilized resource in the 2019 campaign.
This represents a major missed opportunity.

Coders for Labour\[1\] (formerly Coders for Corbyn) is a fairly dead
network of technical volunteers. During the campaign Coders for Labour
updated their Labour tax calculator produced in 2017, built a tool for
examining leaked trade documents\[2\] and updated fun Labour shareable
sites\[3\]. But the level of activity was lower in 2019 compared to 2017.

Momentum has their Momentum Tech Network. This is also under utilised,
as Momentum has not yet substantially dedicated resources to it. Within
the campaign, Momentum bootstrapped the Momentum Tech Collective, a new
initiative from this wider network which on GitLab has 50 members. Some
of this was used well, some poorly. Full time volunteers, “super
volunteers” took up substantial roles coding for the team and
contributed a great deal. But the vast majority of volunteers remained
unorganised and their level of organisation became lesser as the
campaign wore on and staffers and even super volunteers became more
busy. Contributions from the Momentum Tech Collective were often left
unmerged because of lack of time to complete code review. This is
despite the fact the core Momentum team deliberately made technical
choices that would allow for easy volunteer onboarding and allow
contributions to be made.

Campaign Lab\[4\] is a more substantially organised network of
volunteers, with a more data science focus, based around monthly
meetups. This is because unlike other networks it has two people from
Labour Together actively organise it and it has regular meetups outside
of campaign time. During the General Election, one Campaign Lab
volunteer produced a substantial Get Out The Vote dashboard\[5\], which
closely followed existing Labour practice and carefully augmented it.
This was used in a number of CLPs for their activity on polling day.
However, it was not taken up by either Labour or Momentum for wider
distribution in part because it was felt it required rigorous testing
before it could be officially distributed.

During the 2017 election campaign, technical volunteers were encouraged
to get involved at Labour HQ. Labour HQ was open to technical volunteers
at all times to work on projects for the party or their own projects to
contribute to the campaign which, if sufficiently on message, could be
absorbed by it and made official. These technical volunteers produced
substantial pieces of campaign infrastructure in collaboration with
Labour staff like the first public version of Labour’s mass text
messaging tool Chatter.

This did not occur in the 2019 as it was felt managing volunteers was
excessively burdensome. The party neither embraced volunteers and
outside technical help at the expense of volunteer management, nor
defaulted to a suitably resourced ‘in-house’ approach with the expense
of hiring long-term contractors.

One serious issue for all technical volunteers is a lack of access to
core Labour Party tools. As noted, there a substantial section of the
membership from the digital technology community that supports and
campaigns for the Labour Party, but:

1.  They are not able to contribute towards the party’s
    infrastructure, such as fixing bugs, adding simple improvements of
    usability, or optionally new features, because the code is closed
    to the public and there is no technical documentation.

2.  Nor do they have access to sufficient data to provide analysis and
    insight, despite a large data science capacity within the Campaign
    Lab community.

3.  Finally, there is a lack of clarity over the party’s digital (and
    campaigning) strategy that hinders coordinated action by party
    activists.

Both Labour and Momentum did development in closed repositories on
GitHub and GitLab respectively. There is also long debate over whether
proprietary political technologies should be open sourced which is
strongly tied to the concern that they will then be open to exploitation
by ‘hackers’ or stolen for use by ‘the other side’.

To these points our recommendations are to take a pragmatic and staged
approach to open development:

- A phased rollout to additional volunteers, supported by an
  increased staff, can seek to document and close off critical bugs,
  with a defined pathway to full open source.

- Orienting the party’s digital tools towards its unique capacity to
  organise a mass membership will mean that the “system” is not just
  reliant on smart software, but will also require the same social
  base. You cannot download people, after all. Tools will be useless
  for other organisations without these numbers of people. We note
  that Dominic Cummings has open sourced the Brexit campaign’s
  digital platform.\[6\]

## Staff contentions rather than collaboration

At some point it was mooted to hire regional digital officers who could
facilitate wider and more effective use of existing tooling — a
prominent concern of some staff. In one version of events, these
resources were instead diverted to other digital staff roles instead.

On the other hand, many members and staff from teams that received those
new digital staff have reported frustrations about basic reliability
_(for example, the late development of Dialogue hindering campaigning)_
and at the party at large for not commiting to a digital strategy which
enables new forms of organising.

There is a basic interlocking frustration between staff and members
around tech availability on the one hand and capacity availability on
the other. This looks like product of a lack of shared understanding
around the resource allocation and budgeting decision of their mutual
wider department, producing what seems to be an unproductive
relationship.\*\*

\*\*It would be expected that different staff teams work together
productively, rather being divided and put into tension against one
another. Indeed we would advocate digital staff (software engineers or
UX designers) being permanent members of other teams like the regional
offices, COU, Digital Campaigns.

**Making improvements for campaigners requires an ongoing appreciation
for the scale and distribution of challenges facing them. Without this
understanding, organisational tensions build up.**

## A lack of digital technology leadership

In 2015, Tom Watson led a digital transformation initiative through the
then 'Digital' team, from which Digital Campaigns and Digital Organising
were later spun off. The intention was to cohere the party’s tools and
infrastructure and ensure they were servicing campaigners in the best
way possible, devoid of archaic processes and critical issues.

Staff familiar with the project noted that this effort lacked buy-in
from the various Head and Director-level managers of the party (of which
there are many). The challenges of working in this environment were
compounded by the highly factionalised and contentious atmosphere that
has continued to present.

> It felt like being a bull in the china shop but the china is
> invisible.
>
> — An interviewee familiar with the digital transformation project

Despite six months of work, staff noted they had not once been able to
gain access to key tools like Contact Creator despite direct requests to
relevant director level managers. The office dynamics led to despair and
resignations.

The Digital Team function was then replaced with an outsourced provider
to create a corporate plan, although they had no campaigning or
political experience. This 'technology strategy' was then adopted under
then-General Secretary Iain McNichol but not shared with any staff
actually involved, likely in part because it was “incendiary”: it
proposed a centralised function across all technical systems which
contravenes the division of technical ownership between the Digital
Organising team, Contact Creator team, Head of Technology.

While we believe that some clarification of team structure and their
roles and responsibilities is important (though tending toward expansion
not contraction), modern digital teams are not a centralised function of
organisations where digital work is important (the siloed “digital
department”), but rather are embedded in different functions working in
cross-functional teams.

This strategy document’s production resulted in the appointment of a
Director of Technology, who was described as “totally ill-suited to the
role” by staff we spoke to. “This was apparent to most people outside of
senior management within weeks but it took two years for him to go.”
**The Director of Technology left their post during the 2019 election
campaign.**

During their tenure there were two wider roles: a programme manager and
a 'configuration officer' and an intention to manage a development
function, but this did not come to fruition.

**There was a technical leadership vacuum at a time when technical
investment seemed to be tightly scrutinised, the technical capacities of
the party are stretched fragmented, and there are many systems to
maintain and improve, aside from many demands not met by digital
technology.**

**The lack of technical leadership (oversight, analysis, coordination,
advocacy) has left key infrastructure vulnerable to failure and
prevented training, improvements and innovations that, together, would
have almost certainly improved the election result.**

Digital leadership comes from managers actually committing to digital
transformation in the whole organisation, not as “directors of
technology” or somesuch.

Empirical research on digital transformation across several thousand
organisations of various kinds has identified general “cultural and
behavioral challenges” as the most prominent hurdle to successful
digital transformation projects, a wide margin ahead of issues of
pre-existing digital infrastructure or attitudes towards technology per
se.

NCVO similarly noted that in 2020 social purpose organisations will
likely need to “review their organisational culture, including attitudes
to risk and innovation”\[7\] in order to benefit from digital
technology. The McKinsey report identified “three digital-culture
deficiencies: functional and departmental silos, a fear of taking risks,
and difficulty forming and acting on a single view of the customer.”
\[8\]

But cultural change is more difficult in older corporate forms of
organisation that rely heavily on isolated teams and steep management
hierarchies.

## Siloed and manager-heavy organisation

Organisational theory would suggest that good work gets done when a
level of autonomy, mastery and a big cause to rally around is
present.\[9\] This is sadly not the prevailing culture and mode of the
Labour Party.

As we have shown above, the Social Media function of the party alone is
split across five teams. Looking at the full organisational chart of the
central Labour Party that we were able to piece together, we note that
the structure generally is quite complex, with many verticals and shared
reporting lines.

In the diagram below we have highlighted managerial job roles centred
around the Southside and Newcastle offices, identifying at least **5
“executive directors”**, at least **24 “directors”**, at least **30
“heads”** by title by comparison with a variable staff of 300-600, to
illustrate a second point: the Labour Party seems quite top heavy.

![](.//media/image5.png)

Comments from staff seem to reflect this organisational structure:

- Numerous managerial meetings, often contentious in nature

- Trickled down orders that vary day to day

> “For the whole duration I've been here, it's been very rare to have
> someone trying to lay out 'this is what we're trying to achieve' on a
> cross-organisational basis. It's generally always been much more
> compartmentalised and then sort of run through the structure of daily
> meetings, with a whole lot of people in, that cascaded down to their
> team... some of that is just in terms of security or leaking and that
> kind of thing.”  
> — staffer who was hired more than three years ago
>
> “It was fucking chaos, no one knew what was going on day-to-day”
>
> “Overall chaos of the grid”
>
> “No one except for the most seniors had sight of the grid”
>
> “Everything was ticking along but the broader strategy of what the
> campaign was doing just wasn't there”
> — staff seconded to Southside for the campaigning period

“The Party as a whole is lost and confused, they are not sure what
direction they are heading in which results in teams not working well
together as everyone is out for themselves. There is no culture, no
feeling of community as no one supports each other, which makes the
London office feel very hostile and cold.” \[10\]

# Bugs in the ecosystem

It has been well-noted that digital systems were unreliable and lacking
certain features. We aim here to identify some trends and deeper issues.

## Access to digital infrastructure

Possibly one of the most impactful and under-discussed examples of turf
war syndrome is access granted to data and digital tools for decision
making and campaigning.

From Southside staff down to constituency organisers, access to key
tools like Contact Creator, Insight and Mosaic is regularly demanded,
contested and denied.

- We heard multiple constituencies were genuinely impacted by their
  ability of already-struggling campaigns to effectively deploy
  their few resources, **refused access by staff teams after
  requesting it** amidst conflicting information about which roles
  should be allowed access.

- In other cases, requests for access to a tool to beat impending
  **deadlines were frustrated by disputes and delays**, resulting in
  missed opportunities.

- In other cases, a limited number of key-holders meant that
  campaign teams developed bottlenecks when these people were
  unavailable or went on holiday, **in some constituencies leaving
  no one able to plan doorknocking sessions during the general
  election**.

- Access to data and tools frequently causes **disputes** and
  interpersonal, and in some cases inter-organisational **tensions**

There needs to be a much more substantial review and clarification of
how access is granted, to who, for what reasons, and **BY who.** Access
to membership tools like MembersCenter, Organise and voter contact
planning tools like Insight and Contact Creator were frustrated by the
approval chain, local politics and grey-zone ambiguities in the rules
and in law. **"Data protection"** is often the issue of refusal or
delay.

There needs to be complete clarity about rights, access, provision, etc.

## Confusion over GDPR

Quite aside from access and reliability, a basic problem encountered by
people brave enough to plough ahead with phonebanking were told by
regional: you must use Dialogue.

The rationale for this is that, as people have a right to know who is
calling them and how their contact details were acquired, people should
use the Labour Party’s infrastructure. However some constituencies used
“burner” mobile phones after rationalising that, yes: you can say you
were calling on behalf of the Labour Party.

GDPR particularly has been wielded as a weapon to regulate access, with
contradictory reports about who can use and see what. A further knock-on
has been ineffective use of data and tools to mobilise and organise
members.

Legal clarity around the practicalities of GDPR and organising is
urgently required.

> _“GDPR, or the party's interpretation of it, has meant that the only
> way I can contact our members is through a national email system that
> doesn't work effectively, adequately, or often enough... Over many
> years, administrative power has been removed from CLPs and gobbled up
> by the centre — this is bad enough: but when the centre has failed to
> create reliable systems, it's worse.”_
>
> _“Bore them into submission tactics” are required to get access to
> digital tools_
>
> — CLP officers

## Usability of digital infrastructure

> _“My CLP has rarely, if EVER, used  
> Contact Creator, Insight or Promote.”_  
> **— CLP Secretary from the South East**

A tech staffer noted that the "digital product as a whole" was not in
great shape. **It was deemed likely that constituencies where usage of
digital tools was least prevalent typically were the kinds of
constituencies that Labour suffered the most in**. It is likely that
poor access to and skill in using digital tooling, as with other
campaign resources and techniques, affected the number of seats won by
Labour in this election.

Ineffective use of tools has been highlighted in the past to the Digital
Organising team but a lack of capacity has prevented much training or
further development.

# Gaps in the party’s digital ecosystem

What organising systems are desirable but infeasible, that could be
enabled by digital technology? In lieu of a party-wide electoral
strategy, door knocking and contact rates are implicitly the central
focus of campaigning and to this end Contact Creator and its ecosystem
are given the lion’s share of attention, but what follows a
consideration of how to strategise year-round community action and
party-building?

## Door knocking and issue mapping

Most campaigns will track issues on the doorstep to prevent massive
hiccups like not knowing anything about anyone — and yet the Labour
Party was the only party this election not to have this nailed down.

Recording relations also identifies 'path of least resistance'
canvassing options: actions members and supporters can take to influence
friends, family, housemates and old colleagues that take advantage of
pre-existing relationships.

**Contact Creator has provisions for surveys and contact relations built
in, but surveys are rarely used and relations are currently limited to
housemates.**

Every other major party in the UK has a system like this. The
**Conservatives** had _VoteSource_, a bespoke tool.\[11\]

> “Yes ... we’ve covered that,” the activist ploughed on. “**So how
> would you rank the parties on a scale of 0 to 10**, where 0 is no
> chance you would vote for them, and 10 is you definitely would? How
> about the Conservative Party?” \[12\]

The **Liberal** **Democrats** have _MiniVAN_, the same tool that the
Democrats use — an off the shelf legacy from Obama years, turned into a
commercial company.\[13\] And the Brexit Party had _Pericles_ which not
only facilitated doorknocking, but on polling day also facilitated GOTV
by <span class="underline"> </span> **highlighting not-yet-voted pledges
on a map.**\[14\]

In the US, tools like the BERN app have allowed activists to think
through how they leverage their relationships via phone contact list
analysis and “wallcharting”.

Related to this is the concept of casework management. Despite hundreds
of MPs and thousands of councillors, no system exists to track case
management for constituents. There are many such systems widely
available and in use by charities, trade unions and other support
organisations. At their best, they enable “big picture” views that can
contribute to collective action and higher level campaigning.
[<span class="underline">The Lib Dems have a comparable system for
this.</span>](https://www.aldc.org/2012/12/connect-casework-is-here/?fbclid=IwAR3khv0cVCCfF6gPGEI-Wy8bNvuclaVhw04v24A87rHAl2QK_kdmaP2SEJ4)

## A single view of voter contacts

With postal mail, door-knocking and phone-banking as well as social
media all being aimed at voters as well as members, there is a gap in
the ability to track all of this and to verify or measure the effect of
contacts.

Members noted some occasions where voters would be frustrated by
frequent repeat contacts and mail.

One issue is that, as most Labour Party canvassing still takes place
with paper sheets where the data might not be entered for a few days,
there is a significant risk of people being knocked multiple times in
quick succession, especially if everyone follows the recommended model
of where to knock next via the _Insight_ tool. But this is not a problem
that, for example, the Brexit Party will have as they don't have any
other canvassing infrastructure.

## A canonical solution for GOTV

Turnout is not used by many constituencies, whilst various forms of
excel spreadsheets abound to do the on-the-day organising. Campaign
Lab’s GOTV tool is an alternative but has received limited usage.
There must be a solution which can win us votes.

## Activist mobilisation

> _“It seems to me that a key problem is that Organise is very
> Campaigning oriented, and **has not been designed for the day to day
> activities that CLP secretaries perform as the major part of their
> role.** This lack of understanding has given rise to many of the other
> issues... raised.”_  
> **— CLP secretary’s email to the central office**

Labour used to use Nationbuilder on a £200,000 / year contract, which
had pipelines, member management, voter contact management and numerous
other features.\[15\] It’s replacement with Organise, an in-house
platform built by a now-dissolved contract team, focuses on event
management and email creation. Its flaws and reliability issues are
well-documented and have in the past provoked CLP secretaries to
collectively send letters to party management.

Areas of opportunity for the Organise platform, or an alternate contact
management system include:

- Integrate with voter data (e.g. Contact Creator), so that voters
  can be identified as supporters and moved towards party activism.

<!-- end list -->

- Training local party organisers in effective digital organising
  using existing digital tools and methodologies. Examples include
  wall-charting, community mapping and social media good practice.

# Recommendations

In order to fill the above gaps there is a system-level series of
changes that should be considered.

## Organisational change

- Any plan is better than no plan. The Labour Party must always have
  an objective that is shared amongst the team.

- No more restricting the flow of information about basic
  operational matters like scheduling. No campaign is worth
  sacrificing team coordination for a spectacular reveal. Find a
  better strategy.

- Re-role a whole wrung of managers to field organiser functions, to
  cut down on managers and increase the work that is done and the
  understanding on the ground about the work to be done.

## Digital team change

- Hire a substantial full-time permanent digital organizing team of
  3x developers, 1x product designer, 1x user researcher to
  accompany the existing team lead, developer and product manager.

- More than an ad-hoc digital strategy is required to facilitate the
  digital estate of a party of 500,000 members with an annual
  revenue of £60,000,000 and dozens of digital systems.

- Digital space should be considered a core component of the party’s
  electoral strategy, as it is an increasingly influential space
  through which voter opinion evolves.

## Programmes and initiatives

- Make a medium-term commitment to disengage from Experian and end
  consumer surveillance as an electoral tool as a matter of
  principle. In order to do this, the Labour Party will have to
  commit to exploring and doubling down on alternative, less
  individualising and atomising forms of political organising that
  rely less on microtargeting — reliant on HQ — and more on
  relational organising — reliant on everyday members.

- Mass programmes of digital tool training for members, officers,
  staff are required to leverage the existing tools at their
  disposal.

- A streamlined and standardised system for granting access to
  critical digital tools for organising, visible to all party
  members, to ensure the right people have credentials for the right
  tools.

- Legal clarity around the practicalities of GDPR and organising is
  urgently required, available to all party members.

- A public roadmap of what is being built / fixed / improved in the
  next while. It is de rigueur for digital teams to have a public
  roadmap in commercial products.

<!-- end list -->

- Digital tool uptime figures for all tools, with a central channel
  for status reports, to address the problem of uncertainty around
  digital tools’ availability.

  ![](.//media/image4.png)

Such systems also enable this to be tracked. The aim is not to
apportion blame but to highlight to party leadership and the
membership at large what the scale of the problem is, so that informed
decision making can occur.

- Develop a strategy for an open technology platform that third
  party developers and activists can use to facilitate their own
  organising through the party, and contribute back to the system
  through hackathons and volunteer management.

- Existing digital tools need to be vetted for their
  mobile-responsiveness and availability when offline or out of
  signal, for example in rural areas or high-rise tower blocks. More
  generally, accessibility needs to be upheld as a core principle in
  the Labour Party staff development community and facilitated by
  management through funding.

<!-- end list -->

---

1.  See
    [<span class="underline">https://www.codersforlabour.com/</span>](https://www.codersforlabour.com/)
    and
    [<span class="underline">https://github.com/coders-for-labour</span>](https://github.com/coders-for-labour)

2.  [<span class="underline">https://github.com/coders-for-labour/trade.withtories.com</span>](https://github.com/coders-for-labour/trade.withtories.com)

3.  [<span class="underline">https://github.com/coders-for-labour/toryos</span>](https://github.com/coders-for-labour/toryos)

4.  See
    [<span class="underline">https://www.campaignlab.london/</span>](https://www.campaignlab.london/)

5.  See
    [<span class="underline">http://www.getoutthevote.uk/</span>](http://www.getoutthevote.uk/)
    and
    [<span class="underline">https://github.com/bobwhitelock/gotv-dashboard</span>](https://github.com/bobwhitelock/gotv-dashboard)

6.  https://github.com/celestial-winter/vics

7.  Elizabeth Chamberlain et al., ‘The Road Ahead 2020: A Review of the
    Sector’s Operating Environment’ (NCVO, 27 January 2020),
    https://publications.ncvo.org.uk/road-ahead-2020/.

8.  Julie Goran, Laura LaBerge, and Ramesh Srinivasan, ‘Culture for a
    Digital Age’, _McKinsey Quarterly_, July 2017, 10.

9.  ‘The Five Trademarks of Agile Organizations | McKinsey’, accessed 16
    June 2020,
    https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/the-five-trademarks-of-agile-organizations.

10. Anonymous comment by an ex-staffer from the employer review website
    Glassdoor:
    [<span class="underline">https://www.glassdoor.co.uk/Reviews/Employee-Review-Labour-Party-RVW24857581.htm</span>](https://www.glassdoor.co.uk/Reviews/Employee-Review-Labour-Party-RVW24857581.htm)

11. [<span class="underline">https://apps.apple.com/gb/app/votesource-canvasser/id1448349231</span>](https://apps.apple.com/gb/app/votesource-canvasser/id1448349231)

12. ‘Conservative Canvasser Fails to Recognise Lynton Crosby’, accessed
    5 March 2020,
    https://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2019/12/conservative-canvasser-fails-recognise-lynton-crosby.

13. [<span class="underline">https://apps.apple.com/gb/app/minivan-touch/id352087547</span>](https://apps.apple.com/gb/app/minivan-touch/id352087547)

14. Gavin Haynes, ‘The Technology That Could Help the Brexit Party Win
    an Election’, _Vice_ (blog), 12 September 2019,
    https://www.vice.com/en\_uk/article/vb574x/brexit-party-pericles-election-app.

15. https://www.linkedin.com/in/joshua-graham-140a43a6
